
# LinkedIn.com CLF-02 Training
## Introduction 
### AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner exam

The AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Exam is the only foundational level AWS certification Exam available from Amazon Web Services. It serves to validate a candidate's foundational knowledge of the AWS Cloud. In September, 2023, the exam was updated from exam code CLF-C01 to CLF-C02. With the exam code change came some substantial updates that we will go over in this four-part course series. The AWS CLF-CO2 is a multiple-choice, or multiple-response question exam, that is pass or fail. The exam is catered towards cloud beginners and those who don't necessarily have a background in IT. It covers AWS concepts, security and compliance, core AWS services, and economics of the AWS Cloud. There is no prior experience in the AWS Cloud required for someone to prepare for and sit for this exam. The AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Exam is divided into four domains, cloud concepts, which makes up 24% of the exam, security and compliance, which makes up 30% of the exam, cloud technology and services, which makes up 34% of the exam, and billing, pricing, and support, which makes up 12% of the exam. Each of the four courses in this series maps to a specific domain in the exam. Let's dig deeper into the specific domain this course maps to. 

### Cloud Concepts Domain

In the AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner exam, there are four domains. They are Cloud Concepts, Security and Compliance, Cloud Technology and Services, and Billing, Pricing, and Support. The four introductory AWS courses I teach on LinkedIn Learning follow each of these four domains. This first course mainly covers the Cloud Concepts domain of the certification exam, which makes up 24% of the exam. For this portion of the exam, AWS wants you to define the value proposition of the AWS Cloud, identify design principles of the AWS Cloud, understand benefits and strategies for migrating existing IT infrastructure onto the AWS Cloud, and understand concepts of cloud economics. In this course, you will contemplate questions like: What exactly is cloud computing? What makes it different from legacy IT infrastructure? How is the way you pay for your resources different from buying and setting up your own hardware for your own on-premises data centers? You will also learn about concepts like the Well-Architected Framework for building IT infrastructure, the AWS Cloud Adoption Framework for migrating your existing infrastructure onto the AWS Cloud, and advantages of cloud computing over legacy IT infrastructure. Let's get started with learning about what the cloud is, why cloud computing is taking the world by storm, and what Amazon Web Services, the largest cloud computing platform in the world, is used for. 

## Introduction to Cloud Computing

### What is the cloud?

The cloud. You've heard it, "It's on the cloud." "We can do that on the cloud." "Back it up to the cloud." It's impossible to escape it in the tech world, but what exactly is it? I imagine you have a vague idea of what the cloud is as something floating up there, in the sky, that has something to do with data storage, somehow. Yeah, you're on the right track. In reality, the cloud is actually just a new hip way to refer to the internet. Nothing mysterious at all. We all use it, every day, but now we have to consider, do we really know what the internet is? In the most fundamental sense, the internet is a worldwide network of billions and billions of devices. These devices can be computers, servers, cell phones, tablets, or Amazon Alexas. As long as they are connected using the global network, any computer can communicate with any other computer thanks to the internet. And despite things like WiFi and cell phone services making it seem like the internet is up there in the sky, the internet is still created and connected using physical cables. These can be TV cables, fiber optic cables, or copper telephone wires. When you open your favorite web browser and type in a website URL, it sends a request. The request is sent to your internet service provider, which is the company you contract with to provide your internet service. Your internet service provider then sends your request to a server, which searches for the domain name you requested. If it finds a match, it will route your request to the IP address of the server hosting the website. Once your request hits the server of the website you want it to load, the server responds by sending the webpage in little packets back to your computer. The packets are very small and acts like jigsaw pieces that your computer reassembles to load the whole entire webpage. So, the cloud is the internet, and the internet is a global network of billions and billions of devices communicating with each other. And you, as a user of the internet and the cloud, facilitate the transfer of information across the world, faster than ever before.

### What is cloud computing?

So we have this cloud that connects all of our devices together. Through it, we can pass information back and forth, store data, and do other cool stuff. You have to be wondering, what powers the cloud? How does it get its energy? How does it stay on? The answer to that, my friends, is cloud computing. You're used to storing files on your hard drive, right? Sometimes it's a pain to transport that data wherever you go. I know I've forgotten that precious USB stick before. Well, cloud computing solves that issue. It lets you access your data from wherever, as long as you have an internet connection. The technical definition of cloud computing is the on-demand delivery of compute, database storage, application, and other IT resources. This means, through cloud computing services, you have instantaneous access to computational, storage, and software using the internet. Computing resources available when you want it, where you want it. So cloud computing is quite convenient. It's also very flexible when it comes to cost. Instead of the traditional buy first to use model, like when you buy a computer or car, cloud computing utilizes the pay-as-you-go model. This means that you only pay for resources you use, when you use them. For example, say you wanted a server to run your applications on. In the traditional way, you would have to go through a procurement process at your work to find an appropriate server with all the necessary bells and whistles. You would then have to make sure the capacity you're purchasing for isn't too much or too little. Then you have to get the quote from the manufacturer, and then wrestle with the finance department to get the budget approved and device purchased. If the demands from the applications are much higher or lower than expected, you have to go back and go through the procurement process all over again to get a more appropriate server. Your department or company needs to have the funds to then purchase that equipment outright. Cloud computing allows you to pay to use only as much server space and capacity as you need at that moment. When you need more or less, you can adjust the rented capacity, and your monthly bill will adjust along with it. Instead of a large overhead bill on purchasing a piece of hardware that may or may not even match your needs, you get a monthly statement billing you only for as much as you used last month. Cloud computing facilitates collaborations by allowing you to hold virtual meetings, edit documents together, and communicate via email or messaging services. Many of these services that used to cost a lot of money to purchase and maintain can now be purchased by bootstrap startups for $10 a user a month. Cloud computing allows for instantaneous access to computational, storage, and software resources using the internet when and where you want it. It allows for increased flexibility and affordability because you are only charged for what you consume, when you consume. They allow what used to be only possible with big corporate IT budgets to almost anyone with internet access and a few dollars. 

### A brief history of the cloud

How did the idea of cloud computing develop? To start from the beginning, we have to go all the way back to the 1950s with the invention of mainframe computing. Mainframe computing is the concept of having a central computer accessed by numerous user devices. The central computer, which had all the compute capabilities was called the mainframe computer. All the user devices, which sent requests up to the mainframe computer were called dumb terminals. These days, if you peek into a college computer lab, there are computers at every desk fully independent from the ones around it. Back in the fifties, however, computers were extremely expensive to buy and maintain. So instead of placing one at every seat, organizations would buy one mainframe computer and allow the dump terminals to share its compute resources. In the seventies, the concept of virtual machines emerged. Virtual machines are multiple complete operating systems that quote unquote live in a single piece of hardware. For example, you can have multiple Windows virtual machines living in your single Mac laptop. Suddenly, one single mainframe computer could have multiple operating systems running at the same time to do many different things. Then a new idea hit them. What if we could use lots of mainframe computers resources as if it's just one computer? This was the beginning of the modern concept of cloud computing. To make pooling resources a reality, developers created a software called a hypervisor that could be installed onto multiple pieces of hardwares, such as a server. They could then link all of those hardwares and use the combined computational storage powers as one giant resource. Imagine the amount of storage and computing powers you can harness by adding up all the memory and hard drive space of every computer in your office. Programs will run super fast and you can store a lot of files, and you'll be able to analyze data at blazing speed. This is what cloud computing allows people to do in an extremely large scale, using the internet to connect end users to huge computational hardwares in their data centers. 

### Cloud computing in daily life

The cloud. It's everywhere. I bet you use it more than you think. Let's start with email, something you use every day. Cloud computing powers the storage and transfer of your messages so you can communicate with your friends and family. Streaming services, you know, Netflix, Hulu, that kind of thing. When we stream movies and TV shows, we benefit from streaming of video resources using cloud computing. Geese companies store video files on a cloud computing platform and allow thousands of people to access the same video at once. The bandwidth necessary for each video changes every second, and cloud computing services can adjust it depending on the traffic. Many people use the personal account features of Office 365 like outlook.com without realizing it's a cloud computing platform. Google Cloud encompasses many of the features of your Google account, which includes popular services like Gmail, Google Drive, Google Photos, Google Hangouts, Google Calendar, and YouTube. Google Drive is a cloud storage platform for your photos, files, and videos. You can set up automatic backup to the Google Drive, so you can save important files directly from your computer's hard disk to the cloud. It can also be used as a cloud computing power collaboration tool for you to edit files with your colleagues or friends. You can get real time feedback from your collaborators, and as soon as the change is made by another user, you can see it reflected on your browser. For many popular cloud computing services, there is a free tier that most of us use. If you decide you need more space or features, they have subscription plans available for all different levels of computational needs, such as more space or accounts. The change in the amount or type of resources you can access is instantaneous and you can immediately enjoy your expanded storage space or added services. When you no longer want the extra perks, you can change your account tier again, and from then on you will only be charged for the new amount of resources you're consuming. Cloud computing services allow us to consume, produce, and collaborate like never before and instantaneously. Many of them are quite inexpensive and some are even free. Can you think of other popular websites or services you often use that utilize cloud computing? 

### Wrapping up: Cloud computing

The cloud and cloud computing permeate many parts of our daily lives as we utilize the internet for work, school, and personal life. We check emails, post on social media, share documents via online file sharing services, stream hours and hours of videos, and use cloud-based car navigation apps. In this wrap up study break, we will be reviewing concepts like, what is the cloud? What is cloud computing? Quick history of the cloud, and why we utilize cloud computing over legacy IT infrastructure. Let's get started. When someone mentions the cloud, they're referring to the internet. The internet is made of copper wires in a global network of billions and billions of devices. These devices can be computers, tablets, cell phones, Google Home, really anything that can connect to the network to send or receive information. Even though most people did not begin using the internet on a daily basis until the late 90s, the concept of cloud computing dates all the way back to the 50s with the development of mainframe computers accessed by dumb terminals. Dumb terminals themselves didn't have any compute powers, but users could send queries to the mainframe computers using the terminals. Development of virtualization together with a piece of software called the hypervisor allowed us to think big, and by big, I mean pulling together multiple servers and using all of their compute and storage resources together as if we're using one extremely large server. While in the past, the amount of resources you could link together was limited by what was in your physical data center, with cloud computing, you have the ability to access as much resources as the service provider can give you. With the internet, you have almost limitless potential with as much computing power as you can get. It's almost as though we are back in the 50s with our laptops and desktops serving as the dumb terminals and our cloud computing service providers hosting the mainframe computers. Instead of connecting to the mainframe computer and the data center on the same floor, we use the internet to connect to the countless servers linked by hypervisors through big service providers like Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud. 

## Cloud Computing Concepts

### Advantages of cloud computing

So why cloud computing? Think of it this way. You don't have to buy a computer with a huge hard disk because you can save your files on the cloud using services like Dropbox. Not only that, but these files are available from any machine connected to the internet. You don't need to buy an expensive gaming computer to play graphics heavy games because you can use a web service like Parsec to play games on their server loaded with enough memory for seamless playing. Instead of paying hundreds of dollars for a program that you install your computer, you could pay a $10 a month to subscribe to a service to use it through your web browser. How does this work for large businesses? If you are thinking in terms of your company's IT infrastructure, you no longer need to have people setting up physical servers and cabling. The countless hours and dollars spent maintaining a server room and a technology inside can now be used elsewhere. Even things like temperature regulation in the server room could be a source of headaches when setting up the IT department. When a piece of hardware breaks, you have to go through the whole procurement and setup process, which could take months. Cloud computing makes all of that the service provider's issue to solve and gives you a set fee to use the services over the internet. With Cloud computing, you pay only when and what you consume. This avoids the overhead cost of buying too much physical space on premises. If you are about to run out, you can simply scale up on the Cloud within minutes. I dunno about you, but I'm into saving money wherever possible. The Cloud computing service providers take care of the physical infrastructure and their own huge data centers so you and your engineers can worry about other more interesting things, saving you manpower and money. You also benefit from the massive economy of scale. Since larger Cloud computing providers buy their capacities in huge quantities, they are able to offer a portion of their capacity to you for much lower price than if you try to go out and get it for yourself. There are six major advantages to Cloud computing. You can trade capital expense for variable expense, benefit from massive economies of scale, Stop guessing about capacity, increase speed and agility, stop spending money running data centers, and go global in minutes. You no longer have to worry about buying too little or too much of something and you only pay as you go, allowing you to focus your attention and money elsewhere.


### AWS Well-Architected Framework

Errata: 

__There are 6 pillars:__

__1- Operational Excellence__

__2- Security__

__3- Reliability__

__4- Performance Efficiency__

__5- Cost Optimization__

__6- Sustainability.__

See Amazon's [Documentation](https://aws.amazon.com/architecture/well-architected/?wa-lens-whitepapers.sort-by=item.additionalFields.sortDate&wa-lens-whitepapers.sort-order=desc&wa-guidance-whitepapers.sort-by=item.additionalFields.sortDate&wa-guidance-whitepapers.sort-order=desc)

Knowing how to create a well-architected infrastructure allows organizations to build the most secure, durable, efficient, and high-performing IT infrastructure possible. So how can we do that? First, avoid unnecessary costs. Use only what you need and turn off any servers or resources you aren't using. Reserve resources in advance if you know you'll need a certain amount of compute power, as many services give discounts for reservations and upfront payment. Don't forget to continue monitoring for more ways to optimize as your organizational needs change and know which resources are causing which charges on your bills. Best practice number two, reliability. A reliable system has the ability to recover from service disruptions, often by itself. They can also dynamically adjust computing resources to meet demand. You should be testing your disaster recovery settings and incorporating redundancies in your infrastructure. Redundancy refers to the concept of having duplicate copies of resources so that when one goes down, the other can take over to provide seamless cutover experience for end users. The third best practice, efficiency. Performance efficiency is the ability to use computing resources to adjust to system requirements. It should allow for more experimentation, and when a change is set in motion, should be able to go global in minutes. A fourth best practice to consider, infrastructure security. This includes security of information, systems, and assets. Security best practices should be automated. Data should be protected in transit and at rest, which means when it's being moved from one location to another as well as when it's being stored. For example, when someone sends an email, the data is in transit, being transferred using the internet. If you have a file uploaded to a server, it's at rest. Traceability should be enabled along with strong identity foundation. This means that, in case of a security breach, you are able to see who did what at any point, because every user has a unique user account or access key. Who can do and access what should be well-defined and followed. The fifth best practice is operational excellence. This is your ability to run and monitor systems while constantly improving processes and procedures. Everything should be documented, and operational procedures should be frequently refined. Failures should be anticipated and learned from and systems and processes updated to take them into account. If an incident occurs, such as a major service downtime, the whole team should come together to discuss what went wrong, how it could have been prevented, and set up procedures in case it happens again. So there are five best practices when architecting cloud-based IT infrastructure, cost optimization, reliability, performance efficiency, security, and operational excellence. When all five pillars are taken into account and optimized, you will have a highly-performing, stable IT infrastructure that allows your organization to save money, time, and resources.

### AWS Cloud Adoption Framework

Source for [Cloud Adoption Framework](https://aws.amazon.com/cloud-adoption-framework/)

There are a few ways to have your IT infrastructure end up on the AWS cloud. One way is to build directly in AWS from the beginning, utilizing many of its benefits to custom create a cloud solution. Another way, which may be more realistic for companies that are not brand new, is to migrate their existing IT infrastructure to AWS cloud. This is also referred to as adopting. AWS cloud may refer to this exercise as cloud adoption, which is where the AWS cloud adoption framework or AWSCAF comes into play. In a nutshell, AWS cloud adoption framework identifies best practices to help you successfully migrate your IT infrastructure to the cloud. Migrating your IT infrastructure to the cloud doesn't happen instantaneously, and it takes a lot of collaborative teamwork amongst different teams, as well as a lot of planning and optimizing. The AWSCAF provides recommendations for implementing, adapting, configuring and maintaining effective workflows in the cloud. One of the core ideas in this framework is that you will identify opportunities to improve business outcomes, iterate and improve the solutions, and then scale up the scope to sustain the benefits on a larger scale. There are a few ways AWSCAF can be sliced and diced to get a better understanding of what it can do to help your organization effectively adopt the cloud. The AWSCAF has a set of transformation domains, which is a value chain where transformations in each chain or domain allows for the next domain's transformation to happen. Technological transformation enables process transformation, which enables organizational transformation, which then enables product transformation. Let's quickly go over each chain. Technological transformation refers to utilizing the cloud to migrate and modernize legacy infrastructure, application and data and analytics platforms. The next chain, process transformation, talks about digitizing, automating and optimizing business operations. The third chain, organizational transformation, reimagines the organizational model or how your business and technology teams work together to create customer value and meet strategic goals. The final chain, product transformation, reimagines the business model by creating new value proposition and revenue models. As a result of following this value chain from beginning to end, there are specific key business outcomes you're looking to attain, which are reduced business risk, improved environmental, social and governance performance, revenue growth, and increased operational efficiency. The value chain of transformation domains are enabled by a set of foundational capabilities, which is an organization's ability to utilize processes to deploy resources to achieve certain outcomes. Resources can be people, technology or any other asset an organization may have. AWSCAF groups these capabilities in what call perspectives, and there are six of them. AWSCAF's perspectives and foundational capabilities are business, people, governance, platform, security and operations. The first perspective is business perspective, and it ensures that cloud investments accelerate digital transformation and business outcomes. Some common stakeholders for this perspective are CEO, CFO, COO, CIO and CTO. Some examples of foundational capabilities are strategy management and product management. The people perspective creates a culture of continuous growth and learning where change is embraced. Some common stakeholders are CIO, COO, CTO, cloud director and cross-functional leaders. Some examples of foundational capabilities are cloud fluency of employees and organization design. The governance perspective maximizes organizational benefits while minimizing cloud transformation related risks. Some common stakeholders are chief transformation, or some common stakeholders are chief transformation officer, CIO, CTO, CFO, chief data officer and chief risk Officer. Some examples of foundational capabilities are risk management and data governance. The platform perspective focuses on building enterprise grade scalable hybrid cloud platforms, implementing cloud native solutions and modernizing existing infrastructure. Some common stakeholders are CTO, technology leaders, technology architects and technology engineers. Some examples of foundational capabilities are platform engineering and modern application development. We're almost done here. The security perspective strives to achieve confidentiality, and integrity and availability needs of cloud data and workloads. Some common stakeholders may be chief information security officer, chief compliance officer, internal audit leaders, security architects and security engineers. Some examples of foundational capabilities are security governance and threat detection. Finally, the operations perspective ensures that the cloud services delivered meet business needs. Some common stakeholders are infrastructure leaders, operations leaders, site reliability engineers and information technology service managers. Some examples of foundational capabilities are observability management and incident and problem management. Putting these different parts together, we encounter the cloud transformation journey. Each organization's journey into the cloud is different, and in order to have an effective cloud adoption experience, it's necessary to first envision the desired target state, understand your organization's cloud readiness, adapt an agile and iterative approach to transformation incrementally, and learn from experience to achieve the optimal target state. Thus, AWSCAF divides these phases into envision, align, launch and scale. The envision phase demonstrates how cloud adoption will help accelerate business outcomes and objectives. Then you get to the align phase, where you identify capability gaps across the six AWSCAF perspectives. Identify cross organizational dependencies and recognize stakeholder concerns. Then you enter the launch phase, delivering pilot initiatives in production and demonstrating incremental business value before scaling to full production. Finally, you enter the scale phase where you expand pilots, scaling up to meet desired business needs while sustaining the business benefits. Phew, that was a lot. We learned about the AWS cloud adoption framework, the AWSCAF cloud transformation value chain, AWSCAF key business outcomes, AWSCAF perspectives and foundational capabilities, and the AWSCAF cloud transformation journey. Don't worry, most of the content we're learning won't be this dense. You can learn about the AWSCAF in more detail at aws.amazon.com/cloud-adoption-framework, where there are eBooks, infographics, white papers and audio books available for download. 

### Study break: Reviewing Cloud Computing

 Wow, that was a lot of new information. You might be a little overwhelmed, but don't worry, we got through the meat of the information dense part of this course. Let's take a quick study break to review what we learned in the past few lessons. In this section, we learned about the advantages of cloud computing over legacy IT infrastructure, the AWS Well-Architected Framework, and the AWS Cloud Adoption Framework. We'll begin with the six advantages of cloud computing over Legacy on-premises IT infrastructure. They are trade fixed expenses for variable expenses, benefit from massive economies of scale, stop guessing capacity, increase speed and agility, stop spending money running and maintaining data centers, and go global in minutes. Next up is the AWS Well-Architected Framework. The AWS Well-Architected Framework provides best practices framework for designing a stable, robust, and secure IT infrastructure on the cloud. There are six pillars to the framework, and they are operational excellence pillar, security pillar, reliability pillar, performance efficiency pillar, cost optimization pillar, and the sustainability pillar. Let's move on to the AWS Cloud Adoption Framework or AWSCAF. There are a few parts to the AWSCAF which provides recommendations for implementing, adapting, configuring, and maintaining effective workflows in the cloud. AWSCAF has a set of transformation domains, which is a value chain. Each domain's transformation enables the next domain's transformation. The transformational value chains domains are technological transformation, process transformation, organizational transformation, and product transformation. The value chain of transformation domains are enabled by a set of foundational capabilities and perspectives. These perspectives are business perspective, people perspective, governance perspective, platform perspective, security perspective, and operations perspective. Finally, there is the AWSCAF cloud transformation journey, which follows an organization's transformation journey from utilizing on-premises IT infrastructure to adapting the cloud. This transformation journey has four phases which are the envision phase, align phase, launch phase, and scale phase. And that's a wrap. If you're unsure about any of the concepts mentioned in this video, feel free to pause the course and go back to the specific videos. Knowing these concepts could mean a few extra points on the AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Exam, which could go a long way in helping you secure that certification. 